README.md, before:

### PROJECT PRESENTATION
The literary, philological and historical study of illustrated periodicals encounters numerous problems, especially when it comes to nineteenth-century or early twentieth-century periodicals. The main problem is due to the scarcity of preserved editorial archives and correspondence between publishers and writers/illustrators, documents that could record the production processes and editorial practices that guided the construction of the periodicals themselves. <br>
The core idea behind this project is based on the observation that, if it is true that the editorial archives do not exist, it could also be true that much, we suggest, could be deduced from the periodicals themselves. For this reason, the research we wish to bring to your attention aims to study the mutation and/or persistence of layout within individual newspaper issues: the recognition of recurring or discontinuous templates (i.e. “similar layouts”) could indeed provide philological data on the material history of periodicals – in particular on the evolution of the text-image relationship and the visual pervasiveness of advertising – and suggest deductions regarding editorial practices, such as the recognition of an “editorial line” instead of an “authorial intent” in the display of images. This could allow us to conjecture the type of relationship between writer(s)-publisher(s)-illustrator(s), but also to trace the presence of a more or less strong “author’s will” rather than a “publisher’s will”. In other words, the study of periodical layouts and templates could offer a sideways glance at the backstage of editorial practices and the creative process of published authors. <br>
We intend to study this on a limited dataset that considers several early 20th-century Italian periodicals published in Turin as case studies. The layout analysis is performed using a pretrained segmentation-based model which recognises images, text and captions with bounding boxes. The model retrieves the dimensions of the identified bounding boxes, their position and their numbering. From this data, it is calculated the percentage of space occupied by images within each page. Two main variables will be considered to evaluate similarities between layout of pages, namely the number of images on the page and the percentage of space occupied by the images on the page. In this way, similar layouts of pages will be highlighted providing explainability of their similarity based on a quantitative aspect. Moreover, an attempt to label the clusters of similar images with specific templates will be performed.  

### Links
- [OD sharepoint](https://usi365-my.sharepoint.com/personal/pizzam_usi_ch/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?CT=1764095526506&OR=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&CID=61e0ce3a%2D57fd%2D180b%2D9963%2D0092f13a5648&e=5%3A2f7d7c388f494d83adff3c7d38efb360&sharingv2=true&fromShare=true&at=9&clickParams=eyJYLUFwcE5hbWUiOiJNaWNyb3NvZnQgT3V0bG9vayBXZWIgQXBwIiwiWC1BcHBWZXJzaW9uIjoiMjAyNTExMTQwMDEuMTkiLCJPUyI6IkxpbnV4IHVuZGVmaW5lZCJ9&cidOR=Client&id=%2Fpersonal%2Fpizzam%5Fusi%5Fch%2FDocuments%2FDH%2FAPP%20ROCCO%20per%20dimensioni&FolderCTID=0x012000C74763D84F24FF449C0725411796B65E&view=0)
- [Flourish LS](https://public.flourish.studio/visualisation/27443524/)

### Corpus

PERIODICALS:  
- La donna (1905-1916) > Emeroteca Roma (1906-1910, 1913-1914, 1916) > NB digitised as single pages
- La Lettura (1901-1916) > Digiteca Braidense > downloaded 1901-1916 > NB digitised as double pages
- L'illustrazione italiana (start-1916) > BiASA (don't know how to download from there)
- L'Esposizione di Torino (1911) > Turin 1911 Project (don't know how to download from there)
- Adolescenza (start-1916) > still to be digitised
- Bianco, rosso e verde (1915-1916)
- Il corriere dei piccoli (1909-1916)
- La grande illustrazione
- Numero
  
### TODO

@marta
- check no _Image... is present in the name of any file in the corpora 
- check no .jpg/.png id present in the name of any folder in the corpora 
- test instruction to run programs on small datasets 
- (insert "stop images" > do not consider the library mark > not really necessary)  ???
- export single .jpg images from the .pdf file downloaded from the library website 
- verify images annotations (review problem found with the number of bounding boxes?) 
- reflect on other possible parameters to be considered: ex. data of publication (year and/or month), image position on the page 
- do one different cartesian plane for each issue/year of the periodical (for comparing them)? 
- use [SAM3](https://github.com/facebookresearch/sam3) to correct wronng annotations @marta @rocco

@rocco
- push some data on git: examples, segmentation, sets. Leave out only big files
- git for models and images: [Git LFS](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/configuring-git-large-file-storage) 
- add all data on OneDrive @rocco
- ~IMAGES BB NUMBER, IMAGES BB DIMENSION (area), IMAGES BB POSITION (baricentro?), IMAGES BB PERCENTAGE of space occupied within each page (so need to calcutare also the total area of the page, that could be ≠ from the total area of the digitisation, that often includes extra margins)~
- put the noted images in a Cartesian plane, where: x-axis = n. images on the page; y-axis = space % occupied by images

### Notes
- [tool](https://pixspy.com/) to hover with cursor on images and check pixels coordinates.
Pixels have origin (0,0) in the top left corner and highest values on the bottom right corner.
- [images on flourish](https://helpcenter.flourish.studio/hc/en-us/articles/8761551300751-How-to-add-images-to-your-popups-and-panels)
- [reference](https://huggingface.co/spaces/atlury/yolo-document-layout-analysis/tree/main) YOLO model

### PLOT STRUCTURE
- pagina
    - journal name (to be extracted JournalName_Year_PageId)
    - year (to be extracted NomeGiornale_Anno)
    - absolute n. of images
    - percentage of space occupied by images

### To test YOLO model's API connection
Run the following command
```bash
python scripts/test_api.py data/examples/LetturaSportiva_1912_annoVIII-numeri24-25-26-27-28-pag0_resized.jpg
```

### To segment a corpus
Unzip the corpus in the data directory.
Run the following command:
```bash
python scripts/segmentation.py data/PeriodicName_Year_Id
```
e.g.:
```bash
python scripts/segmentation.py data/LetturaSportiva_1912_giu-lug
```

### To aggregate data
e.g.:
```bash
python scripts/aggregate.py data/LetturaSportiva_1912_giu-lug_segmentation_results.json
```

### To create a parquet dataset
- Navigate to /notebook
- Change the name of the dataset to explore in the first code block
- _"play"_ all blocks

Commit message:

new todo about flourish on readme

README.md, after:

### PROJECT PRESENTATION
The literary, philological and historical study of illustrated periodicals encounters numerous problems, especially when it comes to nineteenth-century or early twentieth-century periodicals. The main problem is due to the scarcity of preserved editorial archives and correspondence between publishers and writers/illustrators, documents that could record the production processes and editorial practices that guided the construction of the periodicals themselves. <br>
The core idea behind this project is based on the observation that, if it is true that the editorial archives do not exist, it could also be true that much, we suggest, could be deduced from the periodicals themselves. For this reason, the research we wish to bring to your attention aims to study the mutation and/or persistence of layout within individual newspaper issues: the recognition of recurring or discontinuous templates (i.e. “similar layouts”) could indeed provide philological data on the material history of periodicals – in particular on the evolution of the text-image relationship and the visual pervasiveness of advertising – and suggest deductions regarding editorial practices, such as the recognition of an “editorial line” instead of an “authorial intent” in the display of images. This could allow us to conjecture the type of relationship between writer(s)-publisher(s)-illustrator(s), but also to trace the presence of a more or less strong “author’s will” rather than a “publisher’s will”. In other words, the study of periodical layouts and templates could offer a sideways glance at the backstage of editorial practices and the creative process of published authors. <br>
We intend to study this on a limited dataset that considers several early 20th-century Italian periodicals published in Turin as case studies. The layout analysis is performed using a pretrained segmentation-based model which recognises images, text and captions with bounding boxes. The model retrieves the dimensions of the identified bounding boxes, their position and their numbering. From this data, it is calculated the percentage of space occupied by images within each page. Two main variables will be considered to evaluate similarities between layout of pages, namely the number of images on the page and the percentage of space occupied by the images on the page. In this way, similar layouts of pages will be highlighted providing explainability of their similarity based on a quantitative aspect. Moreover, an attempt to label the clusters of similar images with specific templates will be performed.  

### Links
- [OD sharepoint](https://usi365-my.sharepoint.com/personal/pizzam_usi_ch/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?CT=1764095526506&OR=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&CID=61e0ce3a%2D57fd%2D180b%2D9963%2D0092f13a5648&e=5%3A2f7d7c388f494d83adff3c7d38efb360&sharingv2=true&fromShare=true&at=9&clickParams=eyJYLUFwcE5hbWUiOiJNaWNyb3NvZnQgT3V0bG9vayBXZWIgQXBwIiwiWC1BcHBWZXJzaW9uIjoiMjAyNTExMTQwMDEuMTkiLCJPUyI6IkxpbnV4IHVuZGVmaW5lZCJ9&cidOR=Client&id=%2Fpersonal%2Fpizzam%5Fusi%5Fch%2FDocuments%2FDH%2FAPP%20ROCCO%20per%20dimensioni&FolderCTID=0x012000C74763D84F24FF449C0725411796B65E&view=0)
- [Flourish LS](https://public.flourish.studio/visualisation/27443524/)

### Corpus

PERIODICALS:  
- La donna (1905-1916) > Emeroteca Roma (1906-1910, 1913-1914, 1916) > NB digitised as single pages
- La Lettura (1901-1916) > Digiteca Braidense > downloaded 1901-1916 > NB digitised as double pages
- L'illustrazione italiana (start-1916) > BiASA (don't know how to download from there)
- L'Esposizione di Torino (1911) > Turin 1911 Project (don't know how to download from there)
- Adolescenza (start-1916) > still to be digitised
- Bianco, rosso e verde (1915-1916)
- Il corriere dei piccoli (1909-1916)
- La grande illustrazione
- Numero
  
### TODO

@marta
- check no _Image... is present in the name of any file in the corpora 
- check no .jpg/.png id present in the name of any folder in the corpora 
- test instruction to run programs on small datasets 
- (insert "stop images" > do not consider the library mark > not really necessary)  ???
- export single .jpg images from the .pdf file downloaded from the library website 
- verify images annotations (review problem found with the number of bounding boxes?) 
- reflect on other possible parameters to be considered: ex. data of publication (year and/or month), image position on the page 
- do one different cartesian plane for each issue/year of the periodical (for comparing them)? 
- use [SAM3](https://github.com/facebookresearch/sam3) to correct wronng annotations @marta @rocco

@rocco
- check all data on flourish
- viz annotated images on flourish
- push some data on git: examples, segmentation, sets. Leave out only big files
- git for models and images: [Git LFS](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/configuring-git-large-file-storage) 
- add all data on OneDrive @rocco
- ~IMAGES BB NUMBER, IMAGES BB DIMENSION (area), IMAGES BB POSITION (baricentro?), IMAGES BB PERCENTAGE of space occupied within each page (so need to calcutare also the total area of the page, that could be ≠ from the total area of the digitisation, that often includes extra margins)~
- put the noted images in a Cartesian plane, where: x-axis = n. images on the page; y-axis = space % occupied by images

### Notes
- [tool](https://pixspy.com/) to hover with cursor on images and check pixels coordinates.
Pixels have origin (0,0) in the top left corner and highest values on the bottom right corner.
- [images on flourish](https://helpcenter.flourish.studio/hc/en-us/articles/8761551300751-How-to-add-images-to-your-popups-and-panels)
- [reference](https://huggingface.co/spaces/atlury/yolo-document-layout-analysis/tree/main) YOLO model

### PLOT STRUCTURE
- pagina
    - journal name (to be extracted JournalName_Year_PageId)
    - year (to be extracted NomeGiornale_Anno)
    - absolute n. of images
    - percentage of space occupied by images

### To test YOLO model's API connection
Run the following command
```bash
python scripts/test_api.py data/examples/LetturaSportiva_1912_annoVIII-numeri24-25-26-27-28-pag0_resized.jpg
```

### To segment a corpus
Unzip the corpus in the data directory.
Run the following command:
```bash
python scripts/segmentation.py data/PeriodicName_Year_Id
```
e.g.:
```bash
python scripts/segmentation.py data/LetturaSportiva_1912_giu-lug
```

### To aggregate data
e.g.:
```bash
python scripts/aggregate.py data/LetturaSportiva_1912_giu-lug_segmentation_results.json
```

### To create a parquet dataset
- Navigate to /notebook
- Change the name of the dataset to explore in the first code block
- _"play"_ all blocks
