PROJECT PRESENTATION:  
The literary, philological and historical study of illustrated periodicals encounters numerous problems, especially when it comes to nineteenth-century or early twentieth-century periodicals. The main problem is due to the scarcity of preserved editorial archives and correspondence between publishers and writers/illustrators, documents that could record the production processes and editorial practices that guided the construction of the periodicals themselves.  
The core idea behind this project is based on the observation that, if it is true that the editorial archives do not exist, it could also be true that much, we suggest, could be deduced from the periodicals themselves. For this reason, the research we wish to bring to your attention aims to study the mutation and/or persistence of layout within individual newspaper issues: the recognition of recurring or discontinuous templates (i.e. “similar layouts”) could indeed provide philological data on the material history of periodicals – in particular on the evolution of the text-image relationship and the visual pervasiveness of advertising – and suggest deductions regarding editorial practices, such as the recognition of an “editorial line” instead of an “authorial intent” in the display of images. This could allow us to conjecture the type of relationship between writer(s)-publisher(s)-illustrator(s), but also to trace the presence of a more or less strong “author’s will” rather than a “publisher’s will”. In other words, the study of periodical layouts and templates could offer a sideways glance at the backstage of editorial practices and the creative process of published authors.  
We intend to study this on a limited dataset that considers several early 20th-century Italian periodicals published in Turin as case studies. The layout analysis is performed using a pretrained segmentation-based model which recognises images, text and captions with bounding boxes. The model retrieves the dimensions of the identified bounding boxes, their position and their numbering. From this data, it is calculated the percentage of space occupied by images within each page. Two main variables will be considered to evaluate similarities between layout of pages, namely the number of images on the page and the percentage of space occupied by the images on the page. In this way, similar layouts of pages will be highlighted providing explainability of their similarity based on a quantitative aspect. Moreover, an attempt to label the clusters of similar images with specific templates will be performed.  

Links:  
- [OD sharepoint](https://usi365-my.sharepoint.com/personal/pizzam_usi_ch/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?CT=1764095526506&OR=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&CID=61e0ce3a%2D57fd%2D180b%2D9963%2D0092f13a5648&e=5%3A2f7d7c388f494d83adff3c7d38efb360&sharingv2=true&fromShare=true&at=9&clickParams=eyJYLUFwcE5hbWUiOiJNaWNyb3NvZnQgT3V0bG9vayBXZWIgQXBwIiwiWC1BcHBWZXJzaW9uIjoiMjAyNTExMTQwMDEuMTkiLCJPUyI6IkxpbnV4IHVuZGVmaW5lZCJ9&cidOR=Client&id=%2Fpersonal%2Fpizzam%5Fusi%5Fch%2FDocuments%2FDH%2FAPP%20ROCCO%20per%20dimensioni&FolderCTID=0x012000C74763D84F24FF449C0725411796B65E&view=0)
 
TODO:  
- git for models and images: Git LFS
- "stop images" > do not consider the library mark
- tell the app to export single .jpg images from the .pdf file downloaded from the library website
- tell the app to also calculate the space (percentage) occupied by images within each page
- correct the app and verify that the app correcly annotates images (review problem found with the number of bounding boxes)
  
- AFTER THAT the first part is correctly working, tell the app to put the noted images (bounding boxes dimension, position, numeber, percentage) in a Cartesian plane, where: x-axis = n. images on the page; y-axis = space % occupied by images
- reflect on other possible parameters to be considered: ex. data of publication (year and/or month), image position on the page
- do one different cartesian plane for each issue/year of the periodical (for comparing them)? 

